---
layout: post 
title: Taxonomic Classification Of Microbial Metagenomes Using Minhash Signatures : ASM Microbe 2017
---

Poster # AES LB10 6/2/2017 12:45 - 2:45 PM

Authors: Phillip T. Brooks, Luiz Irber, C. Titus Brown

***Background***: Metagenomics, the study of all of the genomic content in a sample taken directly from the environment can significantly expand our biological knowledge by letting us ask questions directly of ecosystems and their microbial inhabitants. For comparative DNA sequence analysis we developed sourmash, a command line tool and Python library that calculates unique fingerprints (i.e. MinHash signatures) for DNA sequences. MinHash signatures are small relative to the full data set and can be rapidly compared. We hypothesized that sourmash could be used to discern the taxonomic structure of complex microbial communities by comparing signatures from metagenomes to an index containing signatures for all of the microbial genomes in the NCBI Reference Sequences (RefSeq) database.
 
***Methods***: We calculated signatures for 60,052 microbial genomes using sourmash and indexed them in a searchable sequence bloom tree (SBT). Calculation of all signatures took 36 CPU hours and yielded a 4.5 GB publicly available SBT index. Next, we calculated MinHash signatures for a synthetic metagenome (64 assembled genomes) and a mock metagenome (unassembled illumina reads), and assigned taxonomy using sourmash ‘gather’ functionality. Sourmash gather classified sequences by comparing signatures for both metagenomes to indexes containing 64 or ~60,000 signatures representing organisms in the synthetic metagenome or the entirety of the microbial genomes in the NCBI RefSeq database, respectively. 
 
***Results***: Accurate taxonomic classification was restricted by the number of representative k-mers and similarity between sequences such as organisms belonging to the same genus or species, when compared to the signatures for microbial genomes in the NCBI RefSeq database. Sensitivity was enhanced by increased k-mer representation when compared to either index. 
 
***Conclusions***: Sourmash ‘gather’ functionality can be used for strain level taxonomic classification of complex microbial communities in the absence of assembly.
